Succinct Notes on the Eight Sessions Mind Training Namo gurave! The profound teaching known as the Mahāyāna Mind Training Instruction in Eight Sessions contains the following points. 1. Mind Training Pertaining to Food In order for your benefactors' accumulation of merit to be accomplished, to not become indebted through eating food, and to be able to advance to the level of a perfectly enlightened buddha on the basis of just these methods, you should in general cultivate the thought of nurturing the microorganisms in your body and so on. In particular, as you swallow food and drink, connect that with the visualization of taking upon yourself the causal negative actions and their resultant sufferings of all sentient beings. Then, as you breathe out, connect your exhalation with the visualization of sending forth your happiness and virtue. Practice this until it happens naturally. 2. Mind Training Pertaining to Breathing Start by taking, for example, your own mother as a mental object. As you fully exhale through your right nostril, imagine that you are giving away all your virtues and their fruits, which transform into white light. They enter your mother's left nostril, giving her an extraordinary feeling of happiness. As you inhale again, feel that the wind of your breath draws out all the negativities and obscurations from your mother's mind stream through her right nostril, like hair being sheared off with a sharp knife. Imagine that they then gather into a dark mass and enter you through your left nostril. Once this mass arrives in your heart, it directly strikes the cherishing of what you conceive as "I," and then vanishes instantly. Visualize like this twenty-one times, or as many times as you wish, and then continue your giving-and-taking visualization by sending forth infinite rays of white light to your father and all other sentient beings. From time to time, take upon yourself the suffering of the beings from each of the six realms and practice sending forth your happiness and so on to benefit all of them. 3. Training the Mind by Multiplying Your Body into the Number of Grains of Sand in the Ganges and Taking Upon Yourself the Sufferings of the Beings of the Six Realms Imagine that you multiply your body infinitely, equal to the limitless extent of space, and that once you have sent forth a body to every sentient being, all their desires are fulfilled. Then focus on each realm one by one-from the hells up through the higher realms, the ten bodhisattva grounds included-and feel that you are taking upon yourself all the negative actions and obscurations of the beings therein and offering them your happiness and virtues. 4. Mind Training Pertaining to Flesh and Blood Summon into your presence the classes of beings that inflict harm upon yourself, upon all other sentient beings, upon fellow Dharma practitioners, and in particular upon the life span and activities of the sublime and glorious teachers. Imagine evoking them in this way: "You have been my mothers countless times and since time without beginning. Thus, to repay your kindness, I shall offer you this body of mine as a substitute for the bodies of all sentient beings, especially of Dharma practitioners, and even more particularly of the sublime and glorious teachers. Devour my flesh if you like flesh! Drink my blood if you like blood! Chew my bones if you like bones! Take my skin if it is skin you like! If you are in haste, eat me raw! If you are not in a hurry, eat me cooked! I shall give this body to you so you can do with it whatever you please; whether you use it as food, clothing, or a pleasant dwelling place to stay-use it in whichever way you like! Take whatever you want of my body, wealth, and roots of virtue, and do what you want with them! Use them as you wish! Whosoever desires, take them! Use them in whichever way you please!" Recite this without hope and fear. Give away your body like a medicinal plant that, with no notion of self or any particular thoughts even when it is being cut, brings great healing to all sentient beings in need. 5. Mind Training Pertaining to Torma Offering Visualize this world as a torma vessel made of precious jewels. Imagine that your body is then cut into pieces inside this vessel and turned into ambrosia with the recitation of OṂ ĀḤ HŪṂ. Imagine giving it in the form of an offering cloud from the sky treasury to all the guests from within and beyond this world, thus making them delighted and content. At the end, seal this session with a spacelike state of mind free from the concepts of the three spheres. When you arise from that state, meditate that everything is like an illusion. 6. Mind Training Pertaining to the Natural Elements Imagine that the flesh, bones, and other parts of your body constituting the inner element of earth dissolve into the external element of earth. Likewise, your blood, serum, and other body fluids dissolve into the external water element; your body heat and so on dissolve into the external fire element; and your breath and so on dissolve into the wind element. Then contemplate the thought that this body of yours, now transformed into the four natural elements, serves as a basis of sustenance for all sentient beings. From time to time, send beings whatever they may desire from multiple emanations of your body, equal to them in number; at other times, send desirable things directly emanating from your body alone. Sometimes, transform your body into things such as food, clothing, a home, or a ship, and give them away to whomever needs them to use in whatever way they please. In this way, play with whatever you conjure up with your imagination. 7. Training the Mind by Transforming Oneself into a Wish-Fulfilling Jewel Think of your body as a wish-granting jewel from which whatever each being desires descends upon them like rain. Imagine that, in order for those who have not yet entered the path to enter it now, and for the extraordinary qualities of those already on the path to increase more and more, your body transforms into masters teaching the sacred doctrine, volumes of its scriptures, and abundant places and requisites for Dharma practice. You thus accomplish unsurpassed happiness and benefit for those in the three lower realms, for the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, and all the way up to the bodhisattvas on the ten grounds in accordance with their needs. On this point, the older scriptures say that you should transform your body into the form of a wish-fulfilling octagonal beryl gemstone and then proceed with the visualization as before. If beginners do it in that way, so that the object of visualization appears more easily in the mind, it will not be wrong. Whichever way you may find suitable, the meditation will serve its purpose. 8. Mind Training as an Instruction for the Moment of Death According to this teaching, when you approach death, you should make a final offering of all your possessions, large and small. By means of various practices such as the seven-limb practice, and in particular by offering your own body, you should sever your clinging. Then, make the following supplication: "Bless me so that I may not forget the mind training during the four situations when it is most likely to be forgotten-(1) during the moment of death, (2) during the intermediate state, (3) in the mother's womb, and (4) in the next life. Bless me so that I may not lose my mind training in the four situations when it is most likely to be lost-when suffering harm caused by (1) humans, (2) nonhumans, (3) an illness, and (4) when strong afflictions arise. Grant your blessings so that the notion of mind training newly arises where it has not yet arisen and that it grows stronger and stronger where it has already taken root." First make this supplication and then practice loving kindness and compassion through giving and taking. Thus you will face the moment of your death in a state of being perfectly accustomed to the two aspects of bodhicitta. When practicing profound instructions such as these, you should, as a preliminary, do the six preparatory practices, and especially meditate on guru yoga and pray fervently. During the main part, you should develop complete familiarity with each of the visualizations. Afterward, when you rise from the meditation session, you should dedicate the roots of virtue. Also, during all intervals between sessions you should, without separating from the essence of the main practice, spend your time practicing virtuous actions, sustained by mindfulness and vigilance. Once you have gained a certain amount of familiarity with the practice, you should train in such a way that all occasions-both when actually performing the practices and at other times-are taken onto the path. Practicing the two aspects of bodhicitta like this, with all your strength, is a marvelous way of extracting the essence of the freedoms and advantages of this human existence. These notes were penned by Khyentse Wangpo, who received the kind gift of this method from the venerable master Könchok Tenpa Rabgye Palzangpo, the lord of learning and accomplishment. May it bring virtue and excellence! 
